# Copyright 2016 Jeffrey Kegler
# This file is part of Marpa::R3.  Marpa::R3 is free software: you can
# redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
# either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
#
# Marpa::R3 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
# Lesser General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
# General Public License along with Marpa::R3.  If not, see
# http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=head1 NAME

Marpa::R3::Support - Support, and how to report bugs

=head1 Description

Marpa::R3 is free software.
There is no warranty.

=head1 Mailing list

There is a Google Groups mailing list dedicated to Marpa at
L<https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups#!forum/marpa-parser>.

=head1 Bugs

Please report any bugs or feature requests to
C<bug-marpa-xs at rt.cpan.org>, or through the web interface at
L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/ReportBug.html?Queue=Marpa::R3>.
I will be notified, and then you'll automatically be notified of progress on
your bug as I make changes.

=head1 Other resources

You can find documentation for this module with the perldoc command.

=for Marpa::R3::Display
ignore: 1

    perldoc Marpa::R3

=for Marpa::R3::Display::End

You can also look for information at:

=over 4

=item * RT: CPAN's request tracker

L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/Bugs.html?Dist=Marpa-R2>

=item * Search CPAN

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Marpa-R2>

=back

=head1 Copyright and License

=for Marpa::R3::Display
ignore: 1

  Copyright 2016 Jeffrey Kegler
  This file is part of Marpa::R3.  Marpa::R3 is free software: you can
  redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation,
  either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

  Marpa::R3 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
  Lesser General Public License for more details.

  You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser
  General Public License along with Marpa::R3.  If not, see
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

=for Marpa::R3::Display::End

=cut

